# Cloud Run

* In the final section of the course, we’ll turn our attention to developing applications in the Cloud.


* We’ll begin with Cloud Run, which is a managed compute platform that runs stateless containers via web requests or Pub/Sub events.
* Cloud Run is serverless.
* That means it removes all infrastructure management tasks so you can focus on developing applications.
* It’s built on Knative, an open API and runtime environment built on Kubernetes.
* It can be fully managed on Google Cloud, on Google Kubernetes Engine, or anywhere Knative runs.
* Cloud Run is fast.
* It can automatically scale up and down from zero almost instantaneously, and it charges only for the resources used, 
  calculated down to the nearest 100 milliseconds, so you‘ll never pay for over-provisioned resources.


* The Cloud Run developer workflow is a straightforward three-step process.
  1. You write your application using your favorite programming language.
    * This application should start a server that listens for web requests.
  2. You build and package your application into a container image.
  3. The container image is pushed to Artifact Registry, where Cloud Run will deploy it.
* Once you’ve deployed your container image, you’ll get a unique HTTPS URL back.
* Cloud Run then starts your container on demand to handle requests, and ensures that all incoming requests are handled by dynamically adding and removing containers.
* Because Cloud Run is serverless, it means that you, as a developer, can focus on building your application and not on building and maintaining the infrastructure that powers it.


* For some use cases, a container-based workflow is great, because it gives you a great amount of transparency and flexibility.
* Sometimes, you’re just looking for a way to turn source code into an HTTPS endpoint, and you want your vendor to make sure 
  your container image is secure, well-configured and built in a consistent way.
* With Cloud Run, you can do both.
* You can use a container-based workflow, as well as a source-based workflow.


* The source-based approach will deploy source code instead of a container image.
* Cloud Run then builds the source and packages the application into a container image.
* Cloud Run does this using Buildpacks - an open source project.
* Cloud Run handles HTTPS serving for you.
* That means you only have to worry about handling web requests, and you can let Cloud Run take care of adding the encryption.


* The pricing model on Cloud Run is unique; as you only pay for the system resources you use while a container is handling web requests, 
  with a granularity of 100ms, and when it’s starting or shutting down.
* You don’t pay for anything if your container doesn’t handle requests.
* Additionally, there is a small fee for every one million requests you serve.
* The price of container time increases with CPU and memory.
* A container with more vCPU and memory is more expensive.


* You can use Cloud Run to run any binary, as long as it’s compiled for Linux sixty-four bit.
* Now, this means you can use Cloud Run to run web applications written using popular languages, such as: Java, Python, Node.js, PHP, Go, and C++.
* You can also run code written in less popular languages, such as: Cobol, Haskell, and Perl.
*As long as your app handles web requests, you’re good to go.


# Development in the Cloud

* Many applications contain event-driven parts.
* For example, an application that lets users upload images.
* When that event takes place, the image might need to be processed in a few different ways, like converting
  the image to a standard format, converting a thumbnail into different sizes, and storing each new file in a repository.

* This function could be integrated into the application, but then you’d have to provide compute resources for it–whether it happens 
  once a millisecond or once a day.
* With Cloud Run functions, you write a single-purpose function that completes the necessary image manipulations and then arrange for it to 
  automatically run whenever a new image is uploaded.

* Cloud Run functions is a lightweight, event-based, asynchronous compute solution that allows you to create small, single-purpose
  functions that respond to cloud events, without the need to manage a server or a runtime environment.
* These functions can be used to construct application workflows from individual business logic tasks.
* Cloud Run functions can also connect and extend cloud services.

* You’re billed to the nearest 100 milliseconds, but only while your code is running.
* Cloud Run functions supports writing source code in a number of programming languages.
* These include Node.js, Python, Go, Java, Net Core, Ruby, and PHP.
* Events from Cloud Storage and Pub/Sub can trigger Cloud Run functions asynchronously, or you can use HTTP invocation for synchronous execution.








